
# The essence of machine learning

Machine learning is a type of [AI](computers-ai.md) that has taken off in popularity since its inception.

Starting around 2017, a programmer thought it would make a lot of sense to create a recursive [algorithm](computers-software-algorithms.md). In other words:

1. An algorithm is a set of [rules](people-rules.md).
2. Make an algorithm that creates its own rules from the incoming [data](data.md).

This has proven to be sufficiently successful, and the AI boom is in full swing as of the early 2020s with this development.

## Data in, data out

The effective consequence of a machine learning algorithm is that it will have "averaged-out" data from all the incoming information it has received.

- Send 100,000 photos of dogs through the algorithm, it will be able to make a pretty decent picture of a dog and detect a dog photo about 80% of the time.
- Pass everything made by William Shakespeare, and it will be able to generate content that sounds like his writing.
- Run every Hollywood movie through it, and it'll be able to reproduce a decent-looking movie by itself.

However, the constraint comes through its averaging. Computers are [logic machines](logic-cs.md), so they simply operate everything as a calculation. This means that a person has to curate the content if they want a higher quality than average.

## Big data

The AI [trend](trends.md) arose through many [FAANG corporations](faang.md) passing through [the entire internet](computers-software-webdev.md) into their training models.

Naturally, machine learning models trained on the internet will give the same sort of information that the internet gives (i.e., bad information).

One lesser-known aspect of machine learning is that the current computing for it requires a *lot* of processing power. As of 2024, an AI-generated image required an average of 92 cents to generate.

The trend, however, is in full swing, partly because of OpenAI CEO Sam Altman's [exceptional salesmanship](marketing.md), and partly because [many people believe computers can become sentient](https://gainedin.site/machines/).

## Bias and hallucination

Part of the marketability for machine learning comes through how it derives information.

Historically, whenever a computer doesn't know or can't access something, it has responded with specific non-information:

- "Bad command or filename"
- "File not found"
- "Value required for form submission"

In the case of machine learning, most of the advancements have come through what is called "hallucination", which is jargon for "make something up".

Since it shares information as if it were legitimate, people aren't able to tell the difference unless they check the information themselves. That [certainty](understanding-certainty.md) provokes the user to [bias](mind-bias.md) toward thinking the computer is providing legitimate information.

Further than that, the associations toward anthropomorphic bias (i.e., imagining the computer is "thinking") make people imagine the computer had actual thoughts to come to that answer.

In other words, "Give me X information" is actually saying "Give me information that sounds like X would". It works well for generating templates, but needs fact-checking before being submitted.

The situation becomes even more opaque through the algorithm being tailored to give enthusiastic, wordy, ingratiating language in response to *any* prompt. There are some [prompts](computers-ai-ml-prompts.md) that can cut down on the garbage, but it doesn't completely fix the issue.

## The social response to it

Due to a combination of laziness and poor research, most users during the AI boom have severely misused the product:

- Office workers have been known to send awfully-worded, vague emails that leave the recipients thoroughly confused.
- In [schools](education.md), children are often generating essays and turning them in. At the same time, teachers are grading those generated essays with machine learning as well.
- A few ~~stupid~~ brave individuals have used a machine learning algorithm in lieu of an attorney.
- While generic code can be quickly generated by veteran [programmers](computers-software.md), some people imagine they don't need to understand syntax by simply "vibe coding". While the algorithm may be able to create a [front-end appearance](engineering-design.md) of a working product, it can't sufficiently build a [database](database.md) or make everything work together correctly.

An early 2025 study has confirmed that machine learning users are generally *so* low-context that they have absolutely no [memory](mind-memory.md) of the information they were passing through the algorithm.

## Social response + hallucination

AI-generated content often sits squarely inside the uncanny valley. Sometimes, [creative](mind-creativity.md) people can use it, but most AI-generated things are mediocre or garbage.

- The result of this is that creative people become very skillful at prompt engineering, and the work moves from fine-tuning inside software to fine-tuning paragraphs to achieve a desired generation.

Further, the fact that machine learning needs "training data", it has poisoned its own data by flooding the internet with poor-quality content.

- The only sensible solution to this is to use less training data, with more processing and rumination over it, but this takes more time.

Since it's still a dumb computer, any attempts to manually override the algorithm to stop it from outputting certain information often ends in disaster:

- Google tried to make more non-white people and females in its algorithm to be more [inclusive](politics-leftism.md), but ended up making the United States Founding Fathers black-skinned.
- Asking a machine learning algorithm how to make weapons (e.g., mustard gas, napalm) will bring up a denial, but asking how to *avoid* making those weapons will give all the necessary information.
- Requesting information on a subject will lean toward the organization's [bias](mind-bias.md), but not if the user makes the algorithm role-play as someone else.
