
# The Christian values on applied philosophy

## Political Science: Can we understand politics and society?

The unpredictable aspects of living in a fallen world with some people being regenerated by the Holy Spirit make **behavioralism** difficult to implement.

- At the same time, **economic formalism** ends up being remarkably consistent about human nature.

**Interactionism** has merit, and is arguably how God works.

**Social atomism** has limited use due to the changing spiritual nature of each individual at any given point in time.

### The verdict on how much we can understand politics and society

Possible (or partial)

- Economic formalism
- Interactionism

Possible (but difficult)

- Behavioralism
- Social atomism

## Political Science: What's wrong with society?

Since the entire *point* of Christianity is that Jesus is a personal and eternal King, **anarchism** (as well as **anarcho-primitivism** and **anarcho-syndicalism**) is difficult to justify.

The issue of sin is more prevalent than any issues created from [technology](technology.md), so environmentalism is difficult to harmonize.

The male/female dichotomy in Christian doctrine leans heavily toward **complementarianism** and away from **feminism**.

Since **Marxism** (and **Communism**, **distributism**, **Neo-Marxism**, and **Socialism**) branches from dialectical materialism, it's inherently against Christianity, and it is *absurdly* difficult to harmonize the two (though its ideals represent a vision that has aspects close to [what Jesus will institute when He comes back](https://theologos.site/millennium/)).

**Mohism** contains some truths, but implies that human nature can self-conform to being more loving, which defies Christian defeatism.

Christians *do* believe in a type of **reconstructivism**, but is asserted on a much more individual level in this life.

### The verdict on what's wrong with society

Possible (and useful)

- Complementarianism
- Reconstructivism

Possible (or partial)

- Mohism

Possible (but difficult)

- Anarchism
  - Anarcho-primitivism
  - Anarcho-syndicalism
- Environmentalism
- Feminism
- Marxism
  - Communism
  - Distributism
  - Neo-Marxism
  - Socialism

## Political Science: Who should have power in society?

Since Christianity leans into honoring *whatever* government is in control, many government policies are acceptable to them.

- **Communalism** and **individualism** are both acceptable (as well as **communitarianism**), though Christianity leans a little bit toward individualism.
- There is a type of **liberalism** present in Christianity, though it doesn't veer into fully permitting evil and leans away from **libertarianism**.
- Christians have a specific type of **contractarianism** that presumes God established national laws for the lawless ([1 Timothy 1:9](https://biblehub.com/1_timothy/1-9.htm)).
- While the [modern technology trends](https://gainedin.site/machines/) advance **techno-progressivism**, Christians don't really care (with the specific exception of the "mark of the Beast" from [Revelation 13:16-17](https://biblehub.com/revelation/13.htm)).
- Christians also range wildly on the matter of **youthism**.

While they honor government, Christians *do* lean into some political ideas:

- **Egalitarianism** runs strongly, and works somewhat against **mercantilism** and **fascism**.
- They typically believe a type of **speciesism** since the Bible asserts that God created mankind different from all other creations.

All Christians believe in at least *some* form of **conservatism**, even if it's as simple as preserving Scripture itself.

Christians also must believe a degree of **nativism**, especially regarding many traditions and the Bible itself.

Given its secular background, Christians *can* believe **social Darwinism** and **critical race**, but it is difficult to justify alongside Scripture.

### The verdict on who should have power in society

True

- Conservatism
- Nativism

Possible (and useful)

- Contractarianism
- Egalitarianism
- Speciesism

Possible (or partial)

- Communalism
- Communitarianism
- Individualism
- Liberalism
- Techno-progressivism (except the mark of the Beast)
- Youthism

Possible (but difficult)

- Libertarianism
- Mercantilism
  - Fascism
- Social Darwinism
  - Critical race

## Political Science: How should we pick our leaders?

Since Christianity was formed during a polytheistic **theocracy**, there's very little precedent for more modern [political systems](politics-systems.md) (and even less precedent since the [Reformation](history-church.md)).

- **Capitalism** conforms well with the moral realities of man's sinful nature, but directs it toward a type of non-self-interested ends, though **anarcho-capitalism** takes the idea too far to easily conform it.
- **Democracy** connects well with Christian egalitarianism, though it isn't always a hard connection.
- While **political absolutism** (and **enlightened absolutism**) isn't discussed much among Christians, it's acceptable enough (since God will have the final judgment on political leadership).
- **Associationalism** serves as a hybrid between political absolutism and democracy, meaning there's no issue.

To the extent that Christians can disagree with it, they do *not* like alternate theocratic rule, meaning **Islamism** and **secularism** aren't preferable, though there is theological room to believe one of them is an inevitable reality.

### The verdict on how we should pick our leaders

Possible (and useful)

- Capitalism
- Democracy

Possible (or partial)

- Associationalism
- Political absolutism
  - Enlightened absolutism
- Theocracy

Possible (but difficult)

- Anarcho-capitalism

False

- Islamism (generally)
- Secularism (generally)

## Political Science: How should we enforce laws?

To believe in God's grace and mercy creates a general leaning against raw coercive approaches like **authoritarianism** and **totalitarianism**.

There is Christian precedent on *both* sides of some domains:

- **Legal formalism** (and **legalism** with **originalism**), since the rules represent the order of God, but loving behavior in a courtroom can mean bending the rules.
- **Political individualism**, since the downtrodden and suffering may be an individual, or may be a group.

Christians lean into the belief of **natural law** (and some level of **legal realism**), meaning they lean against **positive law** (as well as **legal interpretivism** and **legal naturalism**).

### The verdict on how we should enforce laws

Possible (and useful)

- Natural law

Possible (or partial)

- Legal formalism
- Political individualism
- Legal realism
- Legalism
  - Originalism

Possible (but difficult)

- Authoritarianism
  - Totalitarianism
- Legal interpretivism
- Positive law
  - Legal naturalism

## Philosophy's Culture

Christian philosophical discourse runs closer to their theological circles and applications toward [biblical interpretation](bible-study.md).

- **Aristotelianism** (as well as **Neo-Aristotelianism** and **contextualism**) is *very* strong within much of Christian culture.
- **Cognitivism** and **truth claims** is frequent in Christian tradition, typically within [apologetic evangelism](evangelism.md).
- **Eclecticism** is also frequent among Bible scholars.
- **Scholasticism** is not only common among Christian dialogue, it's part of the Bible!
- **Thomism** is necessary for any heavily measured Christian exploration, since there is no end to the study ([Ecclesiastes 12:12](https://biblehub.com/ecclesiastes/12-12.htm)).

**Particularism** isn't as common, but can be used without any issues.

In some ways, the **Platonic school** leans *against* most Christian thinking.

**Ancient sophism** works somewhat against Christianity, since the emphasis is on how to behave and *not* on abstracted virtue alone.

### The verdict on on philosophy's culture

True

- Scholasticism
- Thomism

Possible (and useful)

- Aristotelianism
  - Neo-Aristotelianism
- Contextualism
- Cognitivism
- Eclecticism
- Truth claim

Possible (or partial)

- Particularism

Possible (but difficult)

- Ancient sophism
- Platonic school
