
#### OpenAI - Matt Levine

Ten days ago OpenAI was worth $86 billion. Investors in OpenAI were about to launch a tender offer to buy employee shares at that valuation, and employees were lining up to tender; there were willing buyers and sellers at that price. Then events occurred. There was a boardroom coup, and OpenAI's founder and chief executive officer, Sam Altman, was fired. At one point, the valuation of OpenAI was apparently _zero dollars:_ Several OpenAI investors were noisily saying that they were going to [write down their shares to zero](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-11-20/openai-staff-threaten-to-go-to-microsoft-if-board-doesn-t-quit), and it looked like Microsoft Corp. was about to [acquire most of OpenAI's staff](https://stratechery.com/2023/openais-misalignment-and-microsofts-gain/) without paying the company (or its other investors) anything for them.

But then there was another boardroom coup, Altman [got his job back](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-11-22/sam-altman-to-return-as-openai-ceo-with-a-new-board), and most of the directors who fired him were themselves fired. Altman returned, and there have been suggestions that he (and Microsoft, OpenAI's biggest investor) extracted some promises that this sort of thing won't be allowed to happen again, that there will be fundamental governance changes to make OpenAI more robust and, probably, more commercial. 

So how much should OpenAI be worth _today?_ Some possible answers:

1. Less than $86 billion, for governance reasons: After a rapid rise in prominence and valuation, OpenAI revealed some serious cracks, _causing its valuation to become zero dollars for a while_, meaning that investors should be far more cautious about it now than they were before. It is more volatile than people thought. The lesson of the last week, I [suggested on Tuesday](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-11-21/openai-is-a-strange-nonprofit), might be "don't invest in nonprofits at an $86 billion valuation"; maybe investors will learn that lesson. 
2. More than $86 billion, for governance reasons: Those cracks were there from the beginning, and investors presumably accounted for them in that $86 billion valuation. But now that Altman has won his power struggle and [cemented his control](https://www.businessinsider.com/sam-altman-openai-staff-loyalty-power-chatgpt-microsoft-2023-11), the future OpenAI [will be _less_ weird and nonprofit-y](https://www.wsj.com/tech/ai/ai-accelerationists-come-out-ahead-with-sam-altmans-return-to-openai-a249605c) and afraid of its own shadow. It's the same exciting business but with better, more investor-friendly governance, so it should be worth more to investors.
3. Less than $86 billion, for governance reasons (2): _Did_ Altman win his power struggle? Ten days ago, he was the CEO and a board member; now he is off the board. Ben Thompson [quotes](https://stratechery.com/2023/sam-altman-back-at-openai-q-going-forward/) a [Reddit post](https://www.reddit.com/r/MachineLearning/comments/1812w04/comment/kabk73s/) arguing that the drama was precipitated by _Altman's_ efforts to seize total control of the board, and that the other board members outmaneuvered him, with the result that his power has been diminished. The other board members "get the outcome they want: Sam and Greg [Brockman] gone from the board; Adam [D'Angelo] remains, who has experience of Sam and Greg's shenanigans; and two mutually agreeable independent board members are added" who will presumably rein in Altman.
4. More than $86 billion, for governance reasons (2): Maybe a board that reins in Altman will start by reining in his [extracurricular AI-related business ventures](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-11-19/altman-sought-billions-for-ai-chip-venture-before-openai-ouster) (a chip company, "an AI-focused hardware device") and make him focus more on OpenAI, which will be good for the company. "When Altman returns, he'll likely have to address claims that he's been distracted by a number of projects, including those outside OpenAI," [reports the Information](https://www.theinformation.com/articles/what-comes-next-for-sam-altmans-openai). Maybe he'll do the hardware stuff within OpenAI instead of in a new startup, creating more value for OpenAI investors.
5. Less than $86 billion, for straightforward business reasons: The instability of the last week was bad for customers, who will be reluctant to base their AI strategies on OpenAI and will shift to its competitors. [Thompson writes](https://stratechery.com/2023/sam-altman-back-at-openai-q-going-forward/): "Any company would have to think long and hard about basing their business on OpenAI's API."
6. More than $86 billion, for business reasons: This last week sure drew a lot of _attention_ to OpenAI and its products and their capabilities, and if you think of OpenAI as basically a consumer internet company then any attention is good. If you read a week of press about how OpenAI's board members are afraid that its product will enslave humanity, I mean, that is kind of good advertising for the capabilities of that product?
7. More than $86 billion, for technological reasons. One precipitating event of the boardroom coup might have been a breakthrough in OpenAI's research. Reuters [reported](https://www.reuters.com/technology/sam-altmans-ouster-openai-was-precipitated-by-letter-board-about-ai-breakthrough-2023-11-22/) that "several staff researchers wrote a letter to the board of directors warning of a powerful artificial intelligence discovery that they said could threaten humanity," and the Information [reported](https://www.theinformation.com/articles/openai-made-an-ai-breakthrough-before-altman-firing-stoking-excitement-and-concern) that this was "an innovation by the company's researchers earlier this year that would allow them to develop far more powerful artificial intelligence models," including a model called Q* that "was able to solve math problems that it hadn't seen before." If you were willing to buy OpenAI stock at an $86 billion valuation as a bet that it would develop increasingly powerful AI models, evidence that it has in fact developed increasingly powerful AI models should cause you to increase your valuation.
8. Less than $86 billion, for regulatory reasons: All this drama is going to increase regulatory attention on AI, and new rules will make it harder for OpenAI to innovate and commercialize rapidly.
9. More than $86 billion, for regulatory reasons: All this drama is going to increase regulatory attention on AI, and new rules will make it harder for OpenAI's _smaller competitors_ to innovate and commercialize rapidly, leaving it with a head start on building a monopoly.
10. Precisely $86 billion: Nothing worth thinking about happened over the last 10 days.

I think that last answer is obviously insane but I am not a venture capitalist! We talk a lot around here, in a semi-joking way, about this [appealing feature of private market investments](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2019-12-20/you-d-pay-not-to-see-your-stock-price): They are less volatile than public investments, because when dramatic shifts in markets or fundamentals happen, _you can ignore them_ and just say that the value of your private investments is miraculously unchanged. Without a market price, you never need to mark to market. It would be very, very funny if the events of the last 10 days caused _no change_ in the valuation of OpenAI. And yet! [The Information reported last week](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2019-12-20/you-d-pay-not-to-see-your-stock-price):

> An OpenAI employee share sale that values the firm at $86 billion is back on track following Sam Altman's reinstatement as CEO late Tuesday night, a person familiar with the matter said. The deal, in which a group of investors led by Thrive Capital will buy up to $1 billion of stock-and conceivably more-held by employees or other investors, is expected to close next month. …
>
> In a statement, a spokesperson for the Josh Kushner-run Thrive said they were impressed by the "resilience and strength" they witnessed over the last few days and that they "consider it a true honor to be their partners now and in the future."

Though the Financial Times [is less confident](https://www.ft.com/content/c4dd2ec0-026f-45dd-a7d4-d7aaa5cf9396):

> An upcoming sale of shares in OpenAI is set to test how much the past week's leadership chaos has cost the company and its backers, though big investors are bullish about securing a high valuation.
>
> The employee stock sale, which had been planned before the sacking last week of chief executive Sam Altman and expected to value the company at $86bn, will continue as planned, according to two investors with direct knowledge of the matter. 
>
> Investors remain confident that a new share sale can still treble the $29bn valuation placed on OpenAI when Microsoft committed to invest $10bn in the company at the start of this year.
>
> "Clearly this almost destroyed a lot of value in the short term, it's hard to say what happens next," said Vinod Khosla, an early investor in OpenAI. "Valuation is a function of investor perceptions. The company is the same or better off than it was last Thursday."
>
> But analysts have suggested that OpenAI will be hit by the week's events, with rival groups such as Google and Amazon representing strong and stable challengers in the race to offer generative artificial intelligence services to businesses and consumers.

I don't know that there are still willing buyers and willing sellers at that $86 billion price, or that there are as many of them as there were 10 days ago, but it seems like there might be. Doesn't someone have to be wrong? I suppose it is possible that the answer is "the distribution of possible OpenAI outcomes is much wider than it was 10 days ago, but the midpoint of that distribution is still $86 billion," but what a weird coincidence that would be.

Actually another possible answer is that the distribution of outcomes is _narrower_ than it used to be. Like, 10 days ago:

1. I suppose it was possible that Altman would come to the board and say "this nonprofit stuff isn't working, we need to fire you and become a regular for-profit startup." I mean, OpenAI used to be _entirely_ a nonprofit, and now it is a hybrid nonprofit/capped-profit entity, and you might have expected it to continue to move in that direction.
2. Conversely, it was totally possible that the nonprofit board would fire Altman and burn the company to the ground in order to prevent it from developing unsafe artificial intelligence. ("Allowing the company to be destroyed 'would be consistent with the mission,'" [a board member apparently told employees](https://www.axios.com/2023/11/20/openai-staff-letter-board-resign-sam-altman).)

And then these last 10 days have cut off some of those possibilities. The first possibility - OpenAI becomes purely for-profit - I guess is still open, but it might be less likely, given the fierce resistance the old board put up and the fact that that board still has a representative on the new board. Altman "[also agreed](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-11-22/sam-altman-to-return-as-openai-ceo-with-a-new-board) to an internal investigation into the conduct that led to his dismissal," which suggests that there will still be a counterbalance to his power in the new company, and limits on his ability to do, uh, whatever that conduct was.

The second possibility - burn the company to the ground, etc. - seems much less likely now. The board _did_ fire Altman, and it almost burned the company to the ground, and then the board blinked, and presumably the new board (and any future board) _won't do that again_. Like, they tried that, they saw what happened, they didn't like it, lessons have been learned, and that is no longer an option for the board.

And so for instance consider Microsoft Corp., which has committed some $13 billion to OpenAI and relies on its products for its AI strategy. One possible conclusion for Microsoft to draw from this drama would be "we need much more robust legal protections, and a board seat, so that this doesn't happen again." But another possible conclusion would be "actually no, it turns out we have plenty of leverage already, we got what we wanted after a few tense days, so we don't need a board seat after all." The Wall Street Journal [reported last week](https://www.wsj.com/tech/ai/satya-nadella-microsoft-ceo-ai-openai-altman-85e75531):

> Even after investing $13 billion, Microsoft didn't have a board seat or visibility into OpenAI's governance, since it worried that having too much sway would alarm increasingly aggressive regulators. That left Microsoft exposed to the risks of OpenAI's curious structure. Altman's company was set up as a nonprofit with a board whose primary responsibility wasn't maximizing shareholder value but developing safe AI "that benefits all of humanity." By not having a board seat, Microsoft ended up blindsided. The company was also vulnerable to Altman leaving to start another company and taking employees with him-or, in a possibility that seemed remote until suddenly it was reality, OpenAI's board firing him without asking for input from its biggest investor. …
>
> Microsoft has had to strike a tricky balance with OpenAI: safeguarding its investment while ensuring that its ownership stake remained below 50% to avoid regulatory pitfalls.

And there were moments last week when it looked like Microsoft had gotten that balance wrong, and its investment might be worthless. But not too many of them? The worst case seems to have been mostly "Microsoft hires Altman and all of his employees and has basically acquired OpenAI for $13 billion"; the best case - and largely the actual outcome - was "Microsoft can tell OpenAI's board what to do even without having a board seat." No board seats and tons of practical leverage is probably better, for economic and regulatory reasons, than having a board seat. And now everyone knows!

Last Monday, I [wrote a column](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2023-11-20/who-controls-openai) the gist of which is "sure the nonprofit OpenAI board technically controls the company and Microsoft and the other investors have no legal rights, but practically the investors have the money and they will probably get what they want." I qualified that conclusion, because at the time the investors conspicuously had not gotten what they wanted, but by Tuesday night they did. It turns out that Microsoft's informal sources of leverage were in fact good enough. It turns out that, in exactly the right circumstances, investing $13 billion in a nonprofit at an $86 billion valuation is fine.
