
JORDAN PETERSON
Strategize Your Practical Needs To Fully Engage In Life
Your brain will thank you for creating a schedule. With a bit of a plan, it will stabilize your nervous system. And that is good. You need something productive to do with your time. You need a career. You need to regulate your intake of alcohol. You need a family. You need the family you have — your parents and siblings — and it would be nice if everyone got along. That is a good initiative in which to put some effort, on which to work. Then, you probably need children at some point. That is what life is. 
You may have a good reason not to be operating in one of those dimensions; they are not all mandatory. But if you are not operating reasonably well in at least three of them, you will not be psychologically thriving. In some sense, that fact is more pragmatic than it is psychological. 
Human beings have a nature (i.e., things we need). If we have what we need, we feel fulfilled. But if we do not, then we feel the lack. This is what behavioral psychologists concentrate on — the practical. They guide you to make a career plan, to negotiate, to say what you mean, to tell the truth, and to listen, particularly to your partner. 
If you listen to your partner, they will actually tell you what they want. Over time, if you practice giving them what they want and they return the favor, you will constantly be giving each other what you both want. It is better to have two brains than one because people think differently — mostly because of their temperament. Negotiation is where wisdom arises, which is part of the psychological transformation that is attendant in an intimate relationship. It is also one of the purposes of a long-term intimate relationship. 

JORDAN PETERSON
Address The Paramount Problem And Answer The Call Of Destiny 
People often wonder how they should decide what to do with their life. One way to approach this curiosity is to notice what interests you. Pay attention to that and you will observe that your interests come in two forms. 
With one, you are interested and engrossed with something you love, an opportunity that beckons, a door that opens. You are eager and enthusiastic to move in that direction, and you find yourself compelled and motivated, enjoying what you are doing. Additionally, you will find there to be problems that interest you — something that is bothering you, obsessing you, something of which you cannot rid yourself. It is a problem that is paramount; it might be personal, conceptual, or political. Yet it is arbitrary at the same time because there are a million things in the world that could worry or concern you and make themselves manifest as problems. But there is a small subset that are, apparently, your problems. If they are your problems, maybe what you have to do is solve them. 
Destiny calls to you in the form of opportunities that beckon and problems that compel. Therefore, you must undergo the process of sorting yourself out, in addition to learning more than you already know, in order to solve the problem. You have to become way more than you to be the person to address the problem. But if addressing the problem calls you to be the person you could be, then the problem is an opportunity too. You can own the problem as your obligation and responsibility and pursue your interests with some degree of seriousness. If you do that, who knows where you might just end up.

JORDAN PETERSON
Schedule Your Time And Create A Calendar
Scheduling your time is extraordinarily useful. First, you should develop a long-term plan, a vision. You need to figure out what you are aiming at and why — and how you are going to break that down into the weeks and days. This allows you to know how to orient yourself so you can begin designing your days. 
Many people profess to hate a schedule or calendar, to which I would respond that they are probably using it wrong. If you resonate with that, you are likely using a calendar as an external tyrant that is telling you how to be a conventionally good person and heaping arbitrary responsibilities on you each day. But that is not how you should use a schedule. 
Instead, you should use a schedule to design the day you would most like to have, which will include accepting some responsibility for making progress to keep your life from collapsing into chaos. You should also schedule activities you want to engage in that day as well. You want to design that day you desire, a day that would be good for you — one you feel that you have moved yourself ahead toward your valued goals and kept chaos under control. If you are using a schedule properly, it can be your friend — and a mechanism to increase your capacity to concentrate. It leads to higher productivity. 
If you are exceptionally scattered, then you can train yourself, for example, to read without distraction. Perhaps for the next week, you read for 10 minutes a day and limit distractions. When you are successful with that, you can try 12 minutes a day, then 15 minutes a day, and so forth. The trick is to set a goal for yourself that is slightly beyond your current level of performance — enough to be challenging and worthwhile if you accomplish it, but not so difficult that you are likely to fail. 
Planning is unbelievably useful, but schedule the life you want.
