
#### The board is in charge - Matt Levine

The other day [I mentioned](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2024-02-29/the-board-of-directors-is-in-charge) a lawsuit against Crown Castle Inc., whose estranged co-founder sued over a deal the company struck with Elliott Investment Management. Elliott had run an activist campaign and threatened a proxy fight, and Crown Castle settled by giving Elliott two board seats. The co-founder, Ted Miller, wants to nominate his own board candidates and objected to Crown Castle's agreement to endorse Elliott's directors without even considering his. "The affairs of Delaware corporations," his lawyers wrote, "must be managed by boards of directors, not backroom deals." 

Well, this week Crown Castle and Elliott [amended their deal](https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1051470/000095014224000618/eh240454086_ex1001.htm) to add a "fiduciary out." That is: They still have a contract saying that the board will endorse Elliott's nominees, but now the contract specifically says that the board can change its mind if it decides that that's in the best interests of shareholders:

> If the Board in good faith determines (a "Recommendation Determination"), after consultation with counsel, that the fiduciary duties of the members of the Board as directors of the Company require that the Board (x) change or withhold a prior recommendation that the Company's shareholders vote "for", or (y) recommend that the Company's shareholders vote "against", the election of a New Director (a "Specified Director"), then: [it can].

That does seem like a fairly straightforward fix. Miller's objection was a technical point of Delaware law: The board of directors has to run the company in the way that it thinks is best for shareholders, so signing a contract saying "the board will recommend your nominees" might be illegal, if (1) the board later gets other nominees, (2) it decides, in its heart of hearts, that those nominees are better, but (3) it feels bound by the contract to recommend the first, worse nominees. But if you rewrite the contract to say "the board can change its mind," that addresses the problem. And these outs are not uncommon. In particular, many public-company merger agreements let the target company's board get out of the merger if, after jumping through some hoops, they conclude that another deal is in the shareholders' best interests.

Obviously rewriting the contract to say that the board can change its mind makes it a less useful contract. But the point is that, here, the board _wanted_ the deal with Elliott, and probably _doesn't_ want Miller's nominees on the board. Rewriting the contract solves the technical problem but probably doesn't change what will actually happen.
