
JORDAN PETERSON
Improve The World Around You
Ego inflation is not something to be tampered with; it is incredibly dangerous. I teach and discuss archetypal stories, but I learned 30 years ago from Carl Jung, who warned of the danger of ego inflation, that knowing the stories does not make you the archetype. That is important to understand. 
A worthwhile goal is to be cognizant of your shortcomings and to be grateful, although the word “grateful” has been overused to signal virtue that is often nonexistent. However, there is a kind of striving for good that is not virtuous; rather, it is an admonition that there is plenty wrong with you, with me, with all of us. Furthermore, it would be good if something were to be done about it — even a little bit — and maybe that would make things a bit better for everybody. That is a noble goal.
It is possible for everyone to make things around them much better than they are. Of course, there are outliers because sometimes you are in such a dire situation. But if you take care of yourself properly, for example, you can make a huge difference in your life, in your family’s life, and in your community’s life. 
People wonder about the meaning of life. What’s it all about? What justifies suffering and misery? Making things better. Making a difference. That’s what justifies it. With all that is pushing against you, ask yourself how much you can push back. Can you move the horror an inch back with all the strength you have at your disposal? The answer to that is: Yes, you can. Doing so makes you better with regard to yourself, but it also makes the world a better place. 

JORDAN PETERSON
Avoid Regret By Taking Chances
When you look at your life, you might look back at travails that you have undertaken. End-of-life surveys that ask people what they regret have shown they do not regret what they did that did not work; they regret what they did not do that could have worked. They regret the chances they did not take. 
Even if you do an evaluation of your biography, one of the things you want to be able to say to yourself — maybe there is nothing better you can say to yourself — is: that was extraordinarily difficult but it was worth it. It is not like you can have one of those without the other because you cannot imagine that you could. Have some confidence in what you have managed to accomplish, the kind of confidence that would instill you with a genuine sense of self despite your fundamental inadequacy. 
To have that fundamental sense of self-regard that is grounded in something real, it has to be based in a narrative that approximates: That was extremely difficult, but it was worth it. You have to have both of those.

JORDAN PETERSON
Pursue Your Interests And Answer The Call To Adventure
In Jungian psychology, circumambulation is a process which involves your future self. When you look back at your experiences, you might notice there are themes in your life, typical experiences which repeat themselves. You are circling yourself as you move across time. 
Jung’s idea was that you have a potential future self who is everything you could be and one which manifests itself moment to moment in your present life by making you interested in certain things. Those interests would guide you along a path that leads to maximal development. While it may sound like a metaphysical idea — or even a mystical idea — it is not. It is actually a profound biological idea. Moment to moment, your interest is captured by the things that will lead you down the path of development. 
There is utility in pursuing those things in which you are interested. That is the call to adventure, a call that takes you many places. But it is an error-ridden process because when new parts of you manifest themselves and you are seized by your interests, you sometimes pursue them quite badly. You stumble around when you try to do something new. That is why the fool is the precursor to the savior from the symbolic perspective: You have to be a fool before you can be a master. If you are not willing to be a fool, then you cannot be a master. 
Yet you are essentially set up so that you are automatically interested in what will fully expand you as a well-adapted creature. Despite the fact you may be a fool, you are still meant to go on the adventure. You are capable of learning enough as a consequence of moving forward on the adventure so that you straighten yourself out across time. 

JORDAN PETERSON
Start Something New And Move Forward
If you never start anything new, you will not develop. The willingness to be a fool is the precursor to transformation — which is to say humility — but you must begin somewhere. After all, when people look back on their lives, they are much more unhappy about what they did not do than the mistakes they made. 
When something beckons to you and fills you with interest, it becomes a beacon of light. It may be only dimly apprehended, but by taking steps toward it, you will become enlightened and informed because of the nature of your experience. You are pushing yourself beyond where you have been, so you learn. But the light is not permanently fixated; it will move. So you must shift yourself slightly as you move forward. You move toward the pillar of light you are following, then it moves — just like God in the Egyptian desert in Exodus. You move toward the light, and it moves away. It will guide you forward. 
Most importantly, you will not stay in stasis, nor will you wander around in circles. Even though you may have traveled 20 miles and only moved forward 3 miles, you have at least moved forward instead of backward. The Gospel of Matthew says, “For whoever has will be given more, and they will have an abundance. Whoever does not have, even what they have will be taken from them.” It is a warning: Do not stay in one place. The world moves away from you if you stand still. There is no stasis; there is only backwards. If you are not moving forward, then you are moving backward. 
As you encounter and tangle with the world, you become more informed. As you continue, you change. You will become smarter as you move forward. Rest assured, you will stumble and make mistakes; there will be no shortage of backtracking. But when you are trying, you will engage in redemptive mistakes. If you pay attention, you will be informed by the results of your errors.  

JORDAN PETERSON
To Find Meaning In Life, You Must Make An Effort
Why would you be disinclined to engage in the process of building a stable family? An immature hedonist would counter and ask, “Why would I want the burden of a family? Why would I want the constraints of a permanent relationship when I can have all the freedom to choose?” Many people will say they do not want to limit themselves to one partner, incorrectly believing that more choice means more freedom. But that mentality is evidence of a deep immaturity and ignorance that has gripped society. What society on the whole does not understand is that you need meaning to sustain you in the face of suffering. If you do not have a sense of meaning, you will become bitter, nihilistic, malevolent, and hopeless. 
Meaning is to be found in the adoption of responsibility — and it will sustain you through the catastrophe that is life. If you are in pain, if you are suffering, desperate, or deteriorating, you will be fortunate if you have a web of relationships that you have cultivated to support, build, and hold you up. That is, for example, what you have in a marriage. 
Both my wife and I were very ill over a period of three years. We have had ample opportunity to reflect on what made that period bearable — at least to the degree it was bearable. What made it bearable? The answer was clear: The love we have for each other, for our children, and for our friends — mutually so. That love was reflected back to us by the broader community. 
To voluntarily bear your cross as you stumble uphill is to adopt responsibility. And it is in the willingness to adopt responsibility that you find meaning — meaning that allows you to bear precisely that load. To voluntarily take on the burden of betrayal, pain, torment, atrocity, and death will lead you to meaning. And the more you bear that responsibility, the more meaning you will find. 

JORDAN PETERSON
Learn And Understand How To Live In The World
The theory that dreams are merely the consequence of random neuronal firing is absolutely absurd, or so it seems to me, because there is nothing random about dreams. Dreams are not like snow on a television screen or static on a radio. Rather, they are structured, complex, and complicated. After all, people have coherent, fully developed dreams with a perfect narrative structure. They are fully developed in some sense. 
Taking the phenomena of dreams seriously is much more useful. For example, if you dream of the future, then you might try to make it into a reality. Or maybe you dream up a nightmare and attempt to make it into a reality. People do that too if they are hellbent on revenge, full of hatred and resentment. Those are dreams that become manifestations of terrible fantasies. They are powerful.
So where does the information in dreams come from? I think it comes from watching the patterns everyone acts out. Representations of those patterns are a part of our cultural history. Canonical patterns of being that are embedded in stories of good and evil, romance, and so on, deeply affect us because they represent what we will act out in the world. We can learn and know more about ourselves when we pay attention to those representations alongside our own behavioral patterns. 
If you are going to live in the world, and you are going to live properly, you must ask a fundamental question: What does “properly” mean and where should the answer be sought? That is what everyone wants to know — how to live in the world. This is a question for all of us, a question we must continue to ask ourselves, to observe in others, and to abstract out across time. 
