
JORDAN PETERSON
Improve The Negative Aspects Of Your Personality Traits
Two of the five personality traits are agreeableness and neuroticism. Both have positive and negative aspects, but you can improve upon the more negative ones.
People who are high in neuroticism tend toward anxiety and emotional pain; they are more likely to respond negatively to complexity and uncertainty. If you are high in neuroticism, you can stabilize your sleep/wake cycles to help regulate your anxiety. Go to bed and eat at the same times. If you are hungry and stressed, your insulin production system becomes destabilized. If you are feeling particularly anxious, it would be worth trying to eat something other than carbs, which may help stabilize your insulin production system. And protect yourself from sources of bad news and shield yourself from an onslaught of negative information, especially when it is not necessary. You need not bury your head in the sand, but constant exposure to catastrophe can often destabilize people — and that is not helpful to you. 
Being low in agreeableness should not destabilize your emotions but could interfere in your relationships with other people because you may tend to take other people’s feelings into consideration less than often. So, make attempts to do things for other people, and make that a practice. Perhaps once a week, consciously do someone a favor or give someone a gift; practice being compassionate and polite. These actions will expand your personality rather than transform it. Being tough-minded, skeptical, and competitive, as disagreeable people often are, can be good, but taking other people’s perspectives into account more often is as well. If your relationships improve, your emotional stability likely will too. 
