
## Factors - Matt Levine

If you invest in stocks, your returns will come from roughly three sources:

1. The broad stock market goes up or down.
2. You can get paid (or lose money) for taking on some particular systematic risk: Small companies' stocks tend to outperform large stocks, and cheap stocks (by price-to-book value) tend to outperform expensive ones. 
3. You can be idiosyncratically good at picking stocks.

The first thing is generally pretty easy to measure; there are widely used broad market indexes. The second thing is less obvious; someone needs to identify the systematic factors and measure the data. The third thing - alpha, investing skill - is generally what's left over after the first two things.

This means that identifying and measuring factors - Thing 2 - is very important. For one thing, those factors are part of a popular investment approach: There are funds that try to capture factor premia by, say, buying cheap stocks and avoiding expensive ones, and you want to know how well that strategy works. For another thing, lots of people _really_ want to know how much investment skill their managers have - how much alpha they create - and since that is the residue after subtracting factor returns, you need to know what those are.

For many academic and other uses, the main factor model is the [Fama-French three-factor model](https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/valuation/fama-french-three-factor-model/), where the three factors are market returns, size ("small minus big") and value ("high minus low," that is, high book-to-price ratio minus low book-to-price ratio). And the main source of historical data on the factors is [Kenneth French's website](https://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html). And here is a fun [Bloomberg Markets story](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2024-03-11/a-fight-over-factor-investing-tests-a-pillar-of-modern-finance) by Mary Childs and Justina Lee about how sometimes that historical data … changes?

> In 2021, three professors then based at the University of Toronto noticed something strange and potentially unsettling. The numbers were "noisy" - that is, they changed in significant ways depending on when they were downloaded from the site. Pat Akey, Adriana Robertson and Mikhail Simutin wrote up their puzzling findings in two working papers. ... The authors noted that changes in the numbers seemed to improve the historical record of the value investment strategy-that is, of buying cheap stocks-and wrote that a "lack of transparency" made it impossible to know what to make of that.
> 
> Fama and French's November article confirms that the numbers were changing and lays out the reasons. Among them: Corrections in historical stock market records and adjustments related to accounting rule changes that affected how some stocks are categorized. French's Dartmouth website now contains an archive of earlier versions of the data, so researchers can compare them.

"Everything is seating charts," I [sometimes](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2019-01-11/direct-listings-are-a-thing-now) [say](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021-06-14/morgan-stanley-s-ted-pick-matched-wits-with-goldman-s-blankfein) [around](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2024-02-22/put-the-money-in-the-boxx), about how informal networks of friendship and influence are often the most important incentives in business. In academia, I suppose the equivalent is that everything is the acknowledgments section of working papers? After Akey, Robertson and Simutin questioned the Fama-French data, Fama and French circulated another paper explaining their methodology and the changes, and they were mad:

> Two days before the paper hit SSRN, a PDF of it landed in the email inboxes of some of the country's top economists and legal scholars. The accompanying message from Fama made it clear why he and French had written the article-and also that he was annoyed. "Most of you are in the acknowledgements of two papers," he wrote. "There is lots of strong language in those papers about the effects of updates in the Fama-French factors. ... Our view is that their results are not surprising for those with experience in asset pricing research." Fama added: "For us, the whole experience is a great example of the old saw: No good deed goes unpunished."

"Most of you are in the acknowledgements" of critical papers is I suppose how academics say "traitors!"

## Yellow - Matt Levine

You could have a model like this:

1. Every company has a capital structure with an order of seniority. Secured debt generally gets paid first, followed by unsecured debt, followed by preferred stock, followed by common stock, etc.
2. Every so often, some weird event flips some part of the seniority, so that people who would normally get paid back first get pushed to the back of the line, and people who would normally be at the back of the line move up.
3. You should try to (1) anticipate (or cause!) those events, (2) buy the stuff that will move up and (3) avoid the stuff that will move down.

Probably the most notable recent case is [Credit Suisse Group AG's additional tier 1 capital securities](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDMtMjAvdWJzLWdvdC1jcmVkaXQtc3Vpc3NlLWZvci1hbG1vc3Qtbm90aGluZz9jbXBpZD1CQkQwMzIwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDAzMjAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bd6800fc1). These AT1s were a form of subordinated debt that ranked senior to common stock in the capital structure, as Credit Suisse's disclosures and presentations frequently said. But they had provisions saying that in certain circumstances - regulatory capital falling below a trigger, or certain national bailouts - they would be _disappear_, and it was not _necessarily_ true that the common stock would disappear in those circumstances. And in fact, when Credit Suisse was acquired by UBS Group AG last year in a regulator-driven shotgun marriage, (1) the common stock got something and (2) the AT1s got nothing. If you had owned the senior AT1s a day before the merger, you would have been smart to sell them and swap into the junior common stock, because that got paid and the AT1s didn't.

This turned out to be very controversial, a lot of people still disagree that the AT1s should have been zeroed, and there are lawsuits. This is a pretty normal feature of this model: Seniority is rarely flipped in some clean, obvious and noncontroversial way; somebody will always sue.

(Some other recent examples share that feature: Generically, there's a company, it has debt, and some new or junior creditors [strike a deal with the company](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjItMDUtMTAvY3JlZGl0LW1hcmtldC1jbGFzaGVzLWFyZS1nZXR0aW5nLXVnbGllci1kaXJ0aWVyLW1vcmUtY29tbW9uP2NtcGlkPUJCRDAzMjAyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDMyMCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B698b43e9) to give it new money in exchange for being made more senior than the previously senior creditors. The creditors left out of the deal [sue](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjItMDQtMDcvZGlzdHJlc3NlZC1kZWJ0LWRlYWwtbWFrZXMtcGVvcGxlLW1hZD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwMzIwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDAzMjAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bb2323af7), claiming that this is not allowed.)

Last year, Yellow Corp., the trucking company, filed for bankruptcy. A week before the bankruptcy, an investment firm called MFN Partners paid something like $23 million to buy a ton of Yellow stock, which [seemed like a weird choice](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDgtMDcvaXJsLXMtdXNlcnMtd2VyZS1ub3QtaXJsP2NtcGlkPUJCRDAzMjAyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDMyMCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B591d4e59): Yellow's bankruptcy was _extremely_ well telegraphed, and generally when a company goes bankrupt its stock becomes worthless. But [in fact](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDgtMTAveW91LWNhbi1zZWxsLXRoZS1iaXRjb2lucy15b3UtZG9uLXQtbWluZT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwMzIwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDAzMjAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bac479e80) Yellow's assets (largely a real estate portfolio) turned out to be more valuable than its debt, there is money left over, and shareholders could get hundreds of millions of dollars back, making this a good trade for MFN. 

Or not. Bloomberg's [Steven Church reports](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL25ld3NsZXR0ZXJzLzIwMjQtMDMtMTkvbWZuLXBhcnRuZXJzLWZpZ2h0cy13aXRoLXllbGxvdy10cnVja2luZy1wZW5zaW9ucy1hbmQtcGJnYz9jbXBpZD1CQkQwMzIwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDAzMjAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B6038212c):

> MFN Partners is the single biggest stockholder of Yellow, which filed bankruptcy last year after failing to win concessions from its union drivers. The company has been liquidating its valuable portfolio of real estate under court oversight and that process has brought in more than initially expected.
> 
> The way things are going, MFN and other shareholders including the US government could share a surplus in the range of hundreds of millions of dollars. But they'll first need to step over pension funds, which have argued they should get the cash because Yellow ditched its retirement obligations in bankruptcy. …
> 
> The pension funds claim that because the trucker shut down and fired tens of thousands of unionized workers, Yellow must kick in at least $582 million to cover future retirement payments, according to court papers. They claim the fight should be handled in private arbitration; the hedge fund says it should play out quickly and in open court, which would get everyone paid faster.

One way to think about this is my model above: Ordinarily, when it is a going concern operating its business normally, a company has to pay its pension obligations. Those pension obligations are senior to the common stock; the shareholders only get the profits after the pension obligations are paid. But in bankruptcy, perhaps, that flips: Perhaps Yellow can walk away from its pension obligations for $0, leaving enough money to pay shareholders. On that model, buying the stock a week before the bankruptcy was a good trade: The stock was junior to the debt and pensions and so worth roughly nothing, but _in bankruptcy_ it could ditch the pensions and become worth more.

This is not the only model, though, and the pension funds and the US Pension Benefit Guarantee Corp. hotly dispute it. The dispute is actually kind of weird. Yellow's unionized drivers are members of various large, union, multiemployer pensions; those pensions are underfunded; and Yellow had contractual obligations to contribute to those pensions. If it stopped doing so and withdrew from the pensions, it would have to put in additional money to cover the underfunded pension liabilities, and those withdrawal liabilities could be as much as $6.5 billion, [Yellow itself estimated](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuc2VjLmdvdi9BcmNoaXZlcy9lZGdhci9kYXRhLzcxNjAwNi8wMDAwOTUwMTcwMjMwNDIwNzEveWVsbC0yMDIzMDYzMC5odG0jbm90ZXNfdG9fY29uc29saWRhdGVkX2ZpbmFuY2lhbF9zdGF0ZW1lbg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B4a029eed). It went bankrupt in large part because of a dispute with its unions over these pensions, so it stopped contributing in bankruptcy and the pensions filed claims for the withdrawal liability.

But in 2021, the US government [bailed out the pension funds](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cud2hpdGVob3VzZS5nb3YvYnJpZWZpbmctcm9vbS9zdGF0ZW1lbnRzLXJlbGVhc2VzLzIwMjIvMTIvMDgvZmFjdC1zaGVldC1wcmVzaWRlbnQtYmlkZW4tYW5ub3VuY2VzLWhpc3RvcmljLXJlbGllZi10by1wcm90ZWN0LWhhcmQtZWFybmVkLXBlbnNpb25zLW9mLWh1bmRyZWRzLW9mLXRob3VzYW5kcy1vZi11bmlvbi13b3JrZXJzLWFuZC1yZXRpcmVlcy8/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bfee842aa) as part of the American Rescue Plan. Now they have plenty of money, so [Yellow argues](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly9kb2N1bWVudC5lcGlxMTEuY29tL2RvY3VtZW50L2dldGRvY3VtZW50c2J5ZG9ja2V0Lz9kb2NrZXRJZD0xMDQ3NTY3JnByb2plY3RDb2RlPVlSQyZkb2NrZXROdW1iZXI9MTMyMiZzb3VyY2U9RE0/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B91466635) that they are not underfunded, so it should have no withdrawal liability: "[The pensions] cannot ignore the [ARP bailout] or feign a need to allocate to the Debtors an attributable share of [unfunded vested benefits] that do not exist, at the expense of the Debtors'  
unsecured creditors and equity holders." The [pensions](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly9kb2N1bWVudC5lcGlxMTEuY29tL2RvY3VtZW50L2dldGRvY3VtZW50c2J5ZG9ja2V0Lz9kb2NrZXRJZD0xMDUzNTAwJnByb2plY3RDb2RlPVlSQyZkb2NrZXROdW1iZXI9MTY2NSZzb3VyY2U9RE0/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96C7723b1c7), and the [PBGC](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/34754866.259831/aHR0cHM6Ly9kb2N1bWVudC5lcGlxMTEuY29tL2RvY3VtZW50L2dldGRvY3VtZW50c2J5ZG9ja2V0Lz9kb2NrZXRJZD0xMDY3Nzg0JnByb2plY3RDb2RlPVlSQyZkb2NrZXROdW1iZXI9MjY0MCZzb3VyY2U9RE0/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Dcecb3c7a) - the government agency that insures pensions - argue, in effect, "oh come on it could not possibly work that way, you can't get out of your pension obligations because of a government bailout of those pensions." But it's worth a shot!
