
## Hedging Against Risk - Matt Levine


### Rates went up

In some sense [the main story of finance](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35121691.264812/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDYtMjAvZGVidC1jb3N0cy1tb3JlLXdoZW4tcmF0ZXMtZ28tdXA_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDQyMjI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNDIyJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bb8f2b007) in the 2020s is "interest rates were very low for a very long time, everyone got used to them, and then they went up rapidly and everyone's intuitions were messed up." This is of course the main story of the [2023 US regional banking crisis](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35121691.264812/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDUtMDQvbm9ib2R5LXRydXN0cy10aGUtYmFua3Mtbm93P2NtcGlkPUJCRDA0MjIyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDQyMiZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bcebc208d), and it is arguably a crucial part of the story of [tech startups](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35121691.264812/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDMtMTAvc3RhcnR1cC1iYW5rLWhhZC1hLXN0YXJ0dXAtYmFuay1ydW4_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDQyMjI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNDIyJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B758358c8), or crypto, or [environmental, social and governance investing](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35121691.264812/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDEtMTgvY29pbmJhc2UtdHJhZGVzLWJlYW5pZS1iYWJpZXM_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDQyMjI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNDIyJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Beba58a75), or [private equity](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35121691.264812/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDYtMjAvZGVidC1jb3N0cy1tb3JlLXdoZW4tcmF0ZXMtZ28tdXA_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDQyMjI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNDIyJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Cb8f2b007), or [private credit hurdle rates](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35121691.264812/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMTAtMDUvZnR4LW1pZ2h0LWhhdmUtZm91bmQtc29tZS1tb25leT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDIyMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MjImdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B71cbb9b0), or any number of other things. Or here's Bloomberg's [Justina Lee on risk parity](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35121691.264812/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDQtMjIvcmF5LWRhbGlvLXMtZmFtb3VzLXRyYWRlLWlzLXNwdXR0ZXJpbmctYW5kLWludmVzdG9ycy1hcmUtYmFpbGluZz9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDIyMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MjImdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bac108044):

> "It's been disappointing for a long time," said Eileen Neill, managing director at Verus Investments, an adviser to New Mexico's roughly $17 billion public employee pension, which axed its risk-parity allocation in December. "The only time risk parity was really successful was at the time of the Great Financial Crisis and that was really its heyday."
> 
> The lackluster run through the post-pandemic booms and busts has rattled faith in an allocation method pioneered by [Ray] Dalio, who built Bridgewater into the world's largest hedge fund. The strategy focuses on diversification across assets based on how volatile each is, and often uses leverage to optimize returns relative to the risks taken.
> 
> It flourished after the 2008 financial crisis as investors sought a way to protect themselves from the next big cataclysm. But as investors went on to plow back into stocks, they lagged in the up years. Then when markets cracked in 2022 — pummeling safe assets like US Treasuries — they were hit even harder.

Intuitively [the way risk parity works](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35121691.264812/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvUmlza19wYXJpdHk/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B5168851c) is that you invest some of your portfolio in stocks and some of it in bonds, with the goal that each part contributes the same amount of volatility to the portfolio. So if stocks have 30% volatility and bonds have 10% volatility, you put three-quarters of your money in bonds and one quarter in stocks, crudely speaking. The more volatile an asset has been, the less money you allocate to it. When bonds have been very stable for a long period, you put a lot of your money in bonds. When stocks then go up a lot for years, you underperform a more-stock-weighted portfolio. When interest rates suddenly go up a lot — and bonds crash before you update your historical volatility measures — you lose money. 

## Index Funds - Matt Levine

### Should index funds be illegal?

We [talked last month](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDUtMDIvaG93LWNvdWxkLXRoZS1kZWF0aC1iZXRzLW1ha2UtbW9uZXk_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDYxMjI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNjEyJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Be67a2d10) about a Federal Trade Commission ruling involving Scott Sheffield, the former chief executive officer of Pioneer Natural Resources. Exxon Mobil Corp. had a deal to buy Pioneer, and the FTC demanded, as a condition of approving the deal, that Sheffield not be allowed to serve on Exxon’s board. The FTC claimed that Sheffield conspired with the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to keep oil prices high: Sheffield had some meetings and communications with OPEC officials, and he also went around making public statements that US oil companies like Pioneer should be more disciplined about capital expenditures and drilling. Instead of rushing to drill more wells every time oil prices went up, they should moderate production so they could actually profit from those high prices.

This view, I should say, was (and is) not at all uncommon, and you do not need a conspiracy to explain it. The US oil industry had quite well-known cycles of overspending during booms and then collapsing in busts; investing in oil drillers was a good way to lose money. The companies knew this, the shareholders knew this, and it just made sense for them all to rethink things. Instead of losing money on oil drilling, wouldn’t it be nicer to _make_ money? The way you do this is by not investing too much in new capacity all the time. Everyone could have come to that conclusion on their own, without conspiring with OPEC, or with each other.

Last month Sheffield [filed a comment with the FTC](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly9maWxlcy5sYnIuY2xvdWQvcHVibGljLzIwMjQtMDUvc2hlZmZpZWxkJTIwMS5wZGY_VmVyc2lvbklkPUVSa1VyNHNxQmluUzFLblFmd1V1MnZOSUJzQjZhcUFEJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9c3Vic3RhY2smdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbA/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B3d487de9), objecting to how he was treated in the Exxon settlement. His basic complaints, which strike me as pretty fair, are (1) the FTC’s claims about his ties to OPEC are false or exaggerated and (2) he didn’t have any opportunity to respond to them, because the FTC’s criticism of him came in a settlement with Exxon without his involvement. But he also defends his decisions to moderate production by saying they were informed, not by conversations with OPEC, but by conversations with BlackRock:

> Pioneer’s new capital framework was informed by discussions with shareholders and Pioneer’s Investor Relations Department, which tracked shareholder and analyst feedback and other public reports. Within the first month of returning as CEO, Mr. Sheffield traveled the country speaking with nearly three dozen of Pioneer’s largest shareholders (comprising more than one-third of the outstanding shares at the time), including major investment managers like Fidelity, TIAA/Nuveen, Capital World Investors, and Blackrock. These firms were managing trillions of dollars for pension and retirement funds and others.
> 
> Nearly all of the shareholders with whom Mr. Sheffield spoke expressed support for moderating growth to improve Pioneer’s free cash flow, strengthen its balance sheet, and lower costs and execution risk. Pioneer and Mr. Sheffield frequently received questions from shareholders on these topics during road shows and conferences. The decision to return more free cash flow to shareholders was undertaken to provide shareholders the level of returns that they expected regardless of oil prices, not to impact oil prices or output. These issues became even more critical when COVID hit.
> 
> There are numerous industry reports documenting the shift in how analysts and shareholders were thinking about the oil industry around the time of Mr. Sheffield’s return as CEO. One report published by Wolfe Research in 2017 explains that “[s]hareholders are demanding cash return.” The analyst firm says, “We implore companies to exert capital discipline and temper growth targets in the pursuit of cash returns. We will resolutely oppose aggressive growth targets and strategies, in general.” The report explains that “oil stocks dramatically underperformed the market” because of concerns about the “End of the Oil Age.” These demands were not hidden from the public or government authorities. Major news organizations covered them. Mr. Sheffield regularly discussed his views on Pioneer’s capital framework given shareholder interest in it.

Again! If you had asked Fidelity, TIAA, Capital and BlackRock “thinking only from your perspective as shareholders _of Pioneer_, ignoring everything else, should Pioneer drill more oil or return cash,” I bet they would all have said “return cash.” The boom-and-bust cycle was well understood at that point, and bad for shareholders; returning cash was the rational thing to do.

And yet those shareholders were _not_ shareholders only of Pioneer: They are giant institutions who own shares in many oil companies. It’s _possible_ that a Pioneer-only shareholder would have said “no, let all the other companies cut production; Pioneer should invest more in drilling to grab market share while everyone else is cutting back.” That is a possibly rational thing to think if you are a shareholder of _one_ oil company, but an insane thing to think if you are a shareholder of _every_ oil company: If everyone increases production, no one gains market share and the price of oil goes down. If all of these shareholders were meeting with Sheffield on the same day they were meeting with other oil CEOs, of course they expressed support for moderating growth.

You [know](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL25ld3NsZXR0ZXJzLzIwMTgtMTItMDcvbW9uZXktc3R1ZmYtcmVndWxhdG9ycy1hc2staWYtaW5kZXgtZnVuZHMtYXJlLWJhZD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNjEyMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA2MTImdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Becc1df72) the [theory](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35693829.260780/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMTUtMDQtMTYvc2hvdWxkLW11dHVhbC1mdW5kcy1iZS1pbGxlZ2FsLT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNjEyMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA2MTImdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bb89eab82): Common ownership of all the companies in an industry, by a handful of big diversified institutional investors, leads to reduced competition over price. This theory is hotly controversial, in part because no one believes that diversified investors go to meetings with CEOs and say “you should cut production to keep prices high.” But here is a CEO almost saying that, as a _defense_ to charges that OPEC told him “you should cut production to keep prices high.” It wasn’t OPEC, it was the mutual funds.

## Private Equity - Matt Levine

A story that I would have told about private equity is that, in the olden days, a private equity fund was a couple of youngish ex-bankers who put up their own money and raised some money from outside investors to do leveraged buyouts of companies with very small equity checks, a novel and risky model in which all the participants — the fund's founders, their outside investors, the lenders — were consciously taking big risks in the swashbucklier corners of the financial markets. And now, decades later, those private equity firms have become gigantic alternative asset managers that run hundreds of billions of dollars for insurance companies, with thousands of employees and much steadier and more diversified returns. Everything has become domesticated and institutionalized. You don't invest with a private equity firm, these days, because you like the fire in the eyes of its 30-year-old founder; you invest because of its giant platform and suite of products and long track record.

Still you want a little fire in the eyes. Bloomberg's [Laura Benitez and Swetha Gopinath report](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35081496.281811/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDQtMTgvcHJpdmF0ZS1lcXVpdHktaW52ZXN0b3JzLWRyaXZpbmctdG91Z2hlci1kZWFscy1hcy1wb3dlci1iYWxhbmNlLXNoaWZ0cz9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDE4MjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MTgmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B9d8cf01b):

> The biggest backers of buyout firms are wielding their ever-growing bargaining power to drive increasingly tough deals. The latest in a string of investor demands is this: If you want our money, put more of yours in first. As a result, some private equity executives — at both big and small firms — are loading up on more debt and pledging personal assets to appease them. This includes their homes and other valuables as well as traditional collateral such as fees and stakes in other funds.
> 
> The equity contributions from buyout firms into new funds has jumped to an average of 5% from 2% last year, and in some cases as much as 20%, according to people familiar with the matter. It's leaving some managers scrambling to find significant amounts of capital in often short time frames, the people said, asking not to be identified discussing private agreements.
> 
> To raise cash, some are taking out high-interest loans that can charge rates into the mid-to-high teens, and are often backed by holiday homes, cars, second businesses and art collections, the people said. Some banks are demanding that executives pledge the bulk, if not all of their personal assets, some of the people said.

"We are not going to invest in your private equity fund unless you'd lose your house if you mess up" just seems like more of a 1970s ask than a 2020s one, but I like it. Meanwhile of course the giant alternative asset managers are also in the business of lending each other money to invest in their funds:

> Investec Plc and JPMorgan Chase & Co. are among banks providing such loans, according to people familiar with the matter. The industry's need for more capital has also given rise to several private credit lenders such as Ares Management, Oaktree Capital Management's 17Capital and Pemberton Asset Management, who have raised, or are raising funds to lend out.

So:

1. Do you think that the Ares and Oaktree professionals need to put a lot of their personal assets into those lending-money-to-private-equity-people funds? Do they have to borrow to do so? From each other? Or what?
2. There's going to be an absolutely amazing Money Stuff when Oaktree tries to seize an Apollo managing director's house after a fund does poorly.

NOTE: THIS AXIOM IS TRUE: MAKE SURE THEY HAVE SOMETHING TO LOSE AS WELL!
