
## Delta One - Matt Levine

### SocGen Delta One

The basic idea of a [delta one desk](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvRGVsdGFfb25l/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B64cb360a) is that you are selling Thing X to a customer, and buying Thing Y from the market, and Thing X and Thing Y are exactly equivalent. Thus "delta one": If you sell stock options, you hedge the options by trading stock, and the amount of stock you need to buy or sell — the "delta" of the option — changes over time as the stock price changes. But if you sell index futures contracts, you can hedge them by buying the stocks in the index (or an exchange-traded fund, etc.), and the ratio never changes: It's always one-for-one, always a delta of one. You're buying a thing at a low price and selling an equivalent thing at, ideally, a higher price.

At some level this should be a fairly low-risk business: The stuff that you are long and the stuff that you are short exactly offset each other, so you shouldn't make or lose money as the market moves. On the other hand, you are trying to make money, and the only way to make money is to take _some_ risk. If you are not taking market risk — if all your trades are fully hedged — and you're making money, then you're taking some other, slightly more esoteric risk. You're taking funding risk, or interest-rate risk. You're taking the risk of the basis between Thing X and almost-but-not-quite-identical Thing Y. You're writing one-day lookbacks into your swaps trades, and taking the legal and reputational risk that a regulator will [fine you for tricking your customers](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjMtMDQtMTEvZ29sZG1hbi1nb3Qtc29tZS1nb29kLXN3YXBzLWRlYWxzP2NtcGlkPUJCRDA0MzAyNF9NT05FWVNUVUZGJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX3NvdXJjZT1uZXdzbGV0dGVyJnV0bV90ZXJtPTI0MDQzMCZ1dG1fY2FtcGFpZ249bW9uZXlzdHVmZg/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bfcc2b722). 

Or bigger risks. One of the great delta-one failures of recent years is when Archegos Capital Management did bazillions of dollars of equity total return swaps with big banks. Those banks fully hedged their stock-price risk — they were long a bazillion dollars of the underlying stock, and short an offsetting bazillion dollars of swaps to Archegos — but they were [taking enormous _credit_ risk to Archegos](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjEtMDctMjkvYXJjaGVnb3Mtd2FzLXRvby1idXN5LWZvci1tYXJnaW4tY2FsbHM_Y21waWQ9QkJEMDQzMDI0X01PTkVZU1RVRkYmdXRtX21lZGl1bT1lbWFpbCZ1dG1fc291cmNlPW5ld3NsZXR0ZXImdXRtX3Rlcm09MjQwNDMwJnV0bV9jYW1wYWlnbj1tb25leXN0dWZm/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bf85b5b52), and when Archegos blew up several of them lost money.

But of course _the_ great delta-one failure of recent years was [Jérôme Kerviel's rogue trading](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMDgtMDEtMzAvamVyb21lLWtlcnZpZWwtaW4taGlzLW93bi13b3Jkc2J1c2luZXNzd2Vlay1idXNpbmVzcy1uZXdzLXN0b2NrLW1hcmtldC1hbmQtZmluYW5jaWFsLWFkdmljZT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B51c17ebd) at Société Générale in 2007 and 2008. The risk that he took was even simpler: He'd buy Thing X for himself, and _pretend_ to sell Thing Y as a perfect hedge. He was doing [completely unhedged directional trades](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly9lbi53aWtpcGVkaWEub3JnL3dpa2kvSiVDMyVBOXIlQzMlQjRtZV9LZXJ2aWVs/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B615e3ce7), and tricking the computer systems into thinking he was doing completely hedged trades. When the stuff he bought went up, this was good: It is easier to make money by buying a thing that goes up than it is to make money while being perfectly hedged. And then the stuff he bought went down and he lost $5.2 billon and went to prison.

I do not have a fully developed theory of delta one roguishness, but it does seem to have a higher-than-usual incidence of roguishness. There is something about its technicality, about the discipline of making money by buying and selling almost-but-not-quite identical things, that might give people ideas. [Especially at SocGen](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDQtMzAvc29jZ2VuLXRyYWRlcnMtaW4tYXNpYS1leGl0ZWQtYWZ0ZXItb3B0aW9ucy1iZXRzLXdlbnQtdW5kZXRlY3RlZD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Bc4ef38d0):

> A pair of traders in Hong Kong have left Societe Generale SA after the French bank discovered a batch of risky bets that went undetected by the firm's risk-management systems, according to people familiar with the matter.
> 
> Kavish Kataria, a trader on the bank's Delta One desk, departed last year along with team head Ken Ng after an internal review of the transactions, said the people, asking not to be identified as the details are not public.
> 
> While SocGen didn't lose any money from the transactions, the trades could have cost the Paris-based lender hundreds of millions of dollars had an intense market downturn occurred, the people said. The lapse raised questions about risk management at one of Europe's biggest banks.
> 
> "Our strict control framework has allowed us to identify a one-off trading incident in 2023, which didn't generate any impact and led to appropriate mending measures," a SocGen spokesperson in Paris said in an emailed statement.

A famous stylized fact about rogue traders is that you only hear about the ones who lose money. From this, you might reasonably conclude that (1) lots of traders take less-than-explicitly-authorized risks with their firms' capital, (2) some of them make money and get promoted, possibly with a "good trade but stop taking unauthorized risks, you lovable scamp" warning, and (3) others lose money and get fired in disgrace. But here we have the rare case of traders getting in trouble for taking less-than-explicitly-authorized risks _without_ losing money. Investment bank risk management is sophisticated enough, and taken seriously enough, that now you can get fired for _theoretical_ losses as well as real ones. (Though if they had _made_ hundreds of millions of dollars, instead of being flattish, I wonder if they'd still be there.)

Also it's not clear how delta one [the actual trade was](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9uZXdzL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDQtMzAvc29jZ2VuLXRyYWRlcnMtaW4tYXNpYS1leGl0ZWQtYWZ0ZXItb3B0aW9ucy1iZXRzLXdlbnQtdW5kZXRlY3RlZD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96Cc4ef38d0):

> Kataria had bet on volatility staying low across Indian stock-market indices, the people said, a strategy that involves dealing in options. SocGen's risk managers failed to pick up on the trades because of a glitch related to their timing, the people said.

I suppose if you're an index trader you're also allowed to buy index options. ([Or not](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuZnQuY29tL2NvbnRlbnQvMTcyNTlmYzctNTczNC00NGY4LTkzZjItNWNlYjM3N2U4MjE0/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B8d031351): "The person who made the trades in Hong Kong had not exceeded authorised trading amounts, but had placed bets on options contracts linked to Indian stock market indices that they had not been authorised to carry out.") Also I must say that Indian stock options are having a moment now: First Jane Street Group was [apparently making buckets of money](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/35212621.276807/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDQtMjIvdGhlLXNlY3JldC10cmFkZS13YXMtb3B0aW9ucy1pbi1pbmRpYT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNDMwMjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA0MzAmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B5f5ead4a) trading Indian options, and now SocGen had a brush with losing hundreds of millions of dollars trading them.

## Financial Instruments - Matt Levine

### Web of debt

The Financial Times [has a fun graphic feature](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/36172030.212875/aHR0cHM6Ly9pZy5mdC5jb20vcHJpdmF0ZS1lcXVpdHkv/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B37dded1c) titled “How private equity tangled banks in a web of debt,” the essential point of which is that everything in finance is more fun with a bit of leverage:

1. If there’s a company, a private equity fund can buy it, putting up some of its own money (the equity) and borrowing the rest, secured by the assets of the company.
2. The private credit fund that made the loan in Step 1 can put up some of its own money and borrow the rest from a bank to fund that loan.
3. The private equity fund buying the company in Step 1 can temporarily borrow the money it uses to write the equity check (a “subscription line”), secured by the commitments of its investors (its limited partners) to eventually put up the money.
4. After buying the company, the private equity fund can take out a margin loan, secured by its equity stake in the company.
5. Or it can take out a net asset value loan, secured by its equity stakes in a whole portfolio of companies it owns.
6. Also the company can borrow more money to pay dividends to the private equity fund.
7. The limited partners can sell their stakes in the private equity fund to a secondaries fund, which can borrow some of the money to buy them.
8. The general partners (sponsors) of the private equity fund can borrow money, “secured by management fees and carried interest income.”
9. Or other funds can borrow money to buy the general partners’ stakes in their firms. 
10. I am sure I am missing some?

I [once wrote](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/36172030.212875/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjEtMTAtMDcvbWF0dC1sZXZpbmUtcy1tb25leS1zdHVmZi1sb29raW5nLWZvci10ZXRoZXItcy1tb25leT9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNzI0MjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA3MjQmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B865019d2) that “a (the?) main move in finance” is this: You take a thing with some risk, you divide it into a risky first-loss piece (the equity) and a safer second-loss piece (the debt), you sell the risky piece to people who want high returns and the safe piece to people who want safety. “Also you can compose this move: You can divide a bunch of things into junior and senior claims, bundle a set of junior or senior claims together, and then slice that bundle into new junior and senior claims.” This FT feature is a series of pictures illustrating that point. Take a set of cash flows anywhere in the vicinity of private equity — the earnings of a company, the returns to private equity limited partners, the commitments of those LPs, the fees paid to the general partners, the the payments on a loan — and you can slice it into safer and riskier pieces, fund the safe piece with debt and juice the returns on the riskier piece.

It would be weird if it were otherwise? Like, if you buy a house, you will probably take out a mortgage, funding most of your purchase with debt (funded by a bank/[insurer](https://link.mail.bloombergbusiness.com/click/36172030.212875/aHR0cHM6Ly93d3cuYmxvb21iZXJnLmNvbS9vcGluaW9uL2FydGljbGVzLzIwMjQtMDctMTYvYmlsbC1hY2ttYW4tY2FuLXR3ZWV0LWhpcy1uZXctZnVuZD9jbXBpZD1CQkQwNzI0MjRfTU9ORVlTVFVGRiZ1dG1fbWVkaXVtPWVtYWlsJnV0bV9zb3VyY2U9bmV3c2xldHRlciZ1dG1fdGVybT0yNDA3MjQmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPW1vbmV5c3R1ZmY/60e87ce39a995a4b1a2deb96B2723cb0e)/whoever who wants a safe return) and some of it with equity (funded by you, who want levered exposure to home-price appreciation). And then you’ll go about your day without thinking “hmm how could I slice this up further,” because you are not fundamentally in the business of slicing up cash flows. But private equity firms are, so every cash flow they come into contact with gets sliced up.

The point of all of this is that at the bottom you have some set of businesses with some set of cash flows, and then those cash flows are sliced and recombined in various ways so that lots of different people (private equity GPs, their LPs, the GPs and LPs of secondaries and GP-stake and private-credit funds, bank lenders, etc.) get exactly the package of cash flows they want. And that is the business they are all in.

“As higher interest rates put pressure on borrowers,” says the FT, “regulators are asking an important question: could the private equity industry pose a risk to the wider financial system?” Sure? I guess? I am not particularly worried — the _banks’_ claims on all of this stuff seem pretty senior, and the substrate at the bottom of all of this leverage (cash flows from lots of businesses) seems reasonably robust and diversified. But a (the?) main risk to the financial system is when people put money into assets that they think are safe, and those safe assets turn out to be correlated and risky. The more sorts of safe tranches you manufacture out of the basic raw materials of business cash flows, the more ways some of them could go wrong.
