
JORDAN PETERSON
Avoid Past Mistakes By Paying Attention
Years ago, psychology students participated in a study in which they wrote about their past traumas. The stories were curative because if the students used words that indicated understanding and comprehension, then they remapped the territory they had not mapped properly the first time they walked over it. 
Everyone is very much concerned with stability, safety from betrayal and malevolence, and avoiding unnecessary tragedy. Any past behavior that indicates there is a hole in the map you are using to orient yourself in the world allows terror to shine through and an alarm to sound, signaling a situation is not good for you. The alarm is saying, “You have a map that has some holes. The holes are places you are probably going to have to go again. But the holes are still there, so you will fall in the hole. And the last time you fell in the hole, the experience was not good for you, so you should be alert.” 
That is the reason traumatic memories will often not go away. It is actually a good thing, although it can be bad if you do not know what to do about it. It is not merely a matter of expressing the emotion that is associated with past catastrophe; in fact, not only does that often not help, but it can also actually make it worse. 
Think of a memory that is old or of a problem that is bothering you right now that will not let you go. You can assess your fantasies because they will often give you a clue as to what the appropriate response needs to be. That is not necessarily the response you have to manifest, but the trick is to implement the response in a manner that stops you from falling into the same hole that you have fallen into before. 
